From Philharmonic Hall in Lincoln Center,
home of the world's greatest musical events,
another program in the
award-winning series: the New York
Philharmonic Young People's Concerts,
under the musical direction of
Leonard Bernstein.
That beautiful melody is from the
Leningrad Symphony by Dmitri
Shostakovich, and that's a typical
Shostakovich sound: broad, noble, proud, songful,
rich with feeling. During the coming
year, 1966, this extraordinary Russian
composer is going to be 60 years old, and
we are therefore dedicating this program
to him and to his lifelong devotion to
his art. May it long continue. But since
this is a birthday party, I'd like to
take a minute or two before we play
his music to make a sort of after-dinner
speech in his honor. I particularly want
to do this because in these days of
musical experimentation, with new fads
chasing each other in and out of the
concert halls, a composer like
Shostakovich can be easily put down.
After all, he's basically a traditional
Russian composer -- a true son of
Tchaikovsky! And no matter how modern he
ever gets, he never loses that tradition;
so the music is always, in some way,
old-fashioned -- or, at least, what critics
and musical intellectuals like to call
old-fashioned. But they're forgetting one
most important thing: he's a genius -- a
real, authentic genius. And there aren't too
many of those around anymore. So that's
why I want to make this personal
birthday toast to him. When the New
York Philharmonic and I visited Russia,
back in 1959, I had the pleasure and
privilege of meeting Shostakovich, and I
had an impression of a very reserved man,
speaking very little, a bit nervous and
very shy. I suspect that that's the true
nature of the man, but you'd never know
it from hearing his music. As a composer he
has a great deal to say -- serious or light,
whatever it happens to be -- and he says
it with enormous confidence, ease, and
boldness. I suppose that's one of the
most fascinating things about artists --
how different they can be as people from
the art they create. The most sure-handed
painter may be very insecure in his
daily life; the greatest writer and they
have trouble spelling the simplest words;
and the most intelligent physicist may
be incapable of adding up an ordinary
grocery bill. Shostakovich
is a bit like that. Out of this
shy man, hidden behind his eyeglasses, has
come some of the most powerful, brash,
un-shy music ever written. His famous
Seventh Symphony, known as the "Leningrad"
Symphony -- which was written in Leningrad
in 1941 while the city was more often
than not in flames from the Nazi
bombings -- that Seventh Symphony lasts 75
minutes, requires an extra brass band, and
makes the walls fall down. Nothing shy
about that. His latest symphony, which is
number 13, lasts an hour and includes a
chorus which sings yet to Yevtushenko’s
famous poem against anti-Semitism. So,
you see, Shostakovich has a lot to say
musically, and very often what he says is
noble, original, and deeply moving. But
this is a birthday party, and birthday
parties should be gay and amusing, not
necessarily noble and moving. Besides, you
should know that Shostakovich is also
world famous for his marvellous sense of
humor.
He's written some of the most downright
funny music there is to be heard, and
therefore, I think it's especially proper
for us to celebrate his birthday in an
atmosphere of fun. So, in just a moment,
instead of a long, serious work, we're
going to play you one of his gayest and
most amusing works: his Ninth Symphony.
Although this Symphony has five
movements, it's a very short work, so we
can play you all of it, and I think
you're going to enjoy it a lot.
This 9th Symphony by Shostakovich is
rather like a witty comedy in the theater,
where you're treated to one joke after another --
puns,
wisecracks, punchlines, surprises,
twisteroos -- but somehow all adding up to
a work of art. Now, almost every symphony
has some kind of joke in it: even the
most serious symphony by Beethoven or
Mahler has at least one movement (usually
called the Scherzo) which is humorous --
maybe not out-and-out comical, but satirical,
or bitter, or mocking, or something. But
this whole symphony by Shostakovich is
all humorous, every minute and every
movement. It's all one big series of jokes.
The first and foremost joke is the very
fact that it is his ninth symphony. You
may well ask what's so funny about that;
well, I'll tell you. That number nine is a
magic number with composers. Ever since
Beethoven, it's come to mean the crowning
final output of a symphonic composer.
Beethoven's Ninth, as you must know, is the
huge symphonic monument of his whole
lifetime -- his last symphony -- and since then,
it's become almost a tradition for a
composer to crown his life with his
ninth symphony -- if he can make it, of
course. Mahler and Bruckner did make it;
they both wrote gigantic ninth symphonies
of farewell. Brahms and Schumann never
got beyond number four, Mendelssohn did
reach 5, and Tchaikovsky reached 6, but if
you can reach number 9, it had better be
a whopper, worthy of that magic number.
But not Shostakovich. You see, he had just
written two whoppers, number seven and
number eight -- both very long, very serious,
very patriotic symphonies, and both
having grown out of his wartime emotions.
But now, it was 1945, the war was over, and
it was time for some comic relief from
those two gigantic symphonies 7 and 8. So
out came number 9 -- a little number 9, and
that in itself is a twisteroo.
But the real jokes begin with the music
itself. Listen to the opening theme, for
instance:
Now that doesn't sound like modern music,
does it? It's more like Haydn from two
centuries ago. In fact, the whole first
movement is written like an old-time
classical symphony, as if by Haydn, with
all the rules strictly observed. Now, that
also doesn't sound very funny at first,
does it? But it turns out to be as soon
as you realize that it's not by Haydn but
by a modern composer named Shostakovich,
and that this 18th century classical
form is really just a spoof -- a take-off of
the old eighteenth-century form. And the
more strictly it imitates Haydn, the
funnier it is, as you begin to recognize
your old pals Exposition, Development, and
Recapitulation -- remember those three hard
words, three parts of the sonata form,
that we discussed in a program last year?
And he goes even further by dutifully
repeating the exposition just as he's
supposed to, by putting the second theme
in the dominant key, just as the old
rules dictated, and having the
recapitulation of it in the tonic key -- all
those formulas from the distant past dug
up again and made fun of. What makes it
even funnier is that his gay little
Haydn-ish tunes are treated to a modern
facelifting, so that they're constantly
surprising you into double takes with
their 20th century sound. For instance,
that merry opening theme in E-flat
major we just heard bounces along just
like Haydn -- until it suddenly stumbles
on a loud wrong note:
Now that wrong note
wouldn't sound so
wrong if it didn't have such a strong
accent on it, to say nothing of a trill --
-- which makes the accent even stronger. In
other words, Shostakovich is calling your
special attention to this wrong note,
like a clown who slips on a banana peel
and laughs at himself before you do. But
it's not only those mischievous wrong-
note tunes of Shostakovich that make his
humor; it's also his way of adding or
skipping a beat here and there where you
least expect it, as in this little theme
which follows the one we just heard.
Now, did you hear that extra beat? It's
especially easy to hear in this tune,
which goes in what is called a sequence --
that is, the same phrase is repeated at a
higher pitch. So once you hear the first
phrase -- [OBOE] -- then you expect the second one
to be identical, only higher, like this: [OBOE]
But that's not what you get -- almost, but
not quite. What you do get is a second
phrase that repeats the first at a
higher pitch, alright, but with one extra
beat added -- just enough to knock you off
balance, like that
tipsy clown.
Do you hear it now? I thought you
would. Of course, it's not the sort of
joke that will make you shriek with
laughter -- I mea, no musical joke is -- but
it's just enough of a twist to make you
smile inside, and that's what a good
musical joke should do. Now, this movement
is full of twists like that: melodic
surprises, and rhythmic surprises, and
especially harmonic surprises -- that is,
moments when you expect the harmony to
go one way and it goes somewhere else
completely unexpectedly, like this spot a
little later on in the movement, where
the opening theme is repeated in the
original key of E-flat major and must
now switch to another key, in which the
second theme is going to appear, namely
the dominant, or B-flat major. But
Shostakovich switches his key
to the furthest harmonic point away from
B-flat major, so that when B-flat
finally does appear, it's a shocker, right
out of the blue. Now, look how he does it:
here's the first theme, with its harmonic switch.
Now that's a mile away from where
we're headed -- B-flat. But without so much
as a blink of the eye, Shostakovich
wrenches us into the required key of
B-flat, like this.
You see, there was no
preparation at all for this new key, or
rather, there was a misleading
preparation, as if for some totally
foreign key, and then bam -- B-flat major.
Now, listen to the whole section and see
how the harmony jerks you from key to
key.
It's like a ride on some mad Coney
Island machine, where you're whipped and
flung in fifty different directions, always when you
least expect it.
But anyway, shaken up as we are, we have
reached the dominant key of D-flat and
we are now ready for the appearance of
the second theme. Here comes another
twist: you may remember from our program
on sonata form that the second theme of
a symphonic movement should provide a
contrast with the first theme, not only
in key, but also in feeling -- that is, if the
first theme is strong and manly, the
second theme is likely to be sweet and
feminine, or vice-versa. Anyway, in this
case, the first theme, as you heard, was
playful and bouncy, and so we're led to
expect a second theme that will contrast
by being sweet and smooth. And what do we
get? Anything but, because out comes a
jaunty little marching tune whistled by
the tiny, tinny piccolo.
And so on. So we've got another surprise.
You see, most musical jokes are surprises,
just as most other jokes are: you expect
one thing and you get another, and
somehow that tickles your funny bone.
Nobody knows why. And this surprising,
silly second theme sounds even sillier
when it comes back in the recapitulation,
because this time it's played not even
by the piccolo, but by one single solo
violin who's forcing out that squeaky
little tune over the accompaniment of a
whole brass section:
It's like Mickey Mouse leading a football
cheer!
It's that high, puny voice competing
with a whole brass band. And speaking
of the brass band, my favorite joke of the
whole movement is made by that hefty
trombone back there who introduces this
tune each time it comes with those
pompous two notes.
Now, as you'll see when
we play the whole movement, all through
this section of the recapitulation, which
leads up to the squeaky second theme,
that trombone keeps plowing in with his
two notes, always in the wrong places, as
though he's skipped 50 bars of music by
mistake and is coming too soon.
Poor man, he's absolutely lost! But he
doesn't give up: he keeps trying, like
Pluto in those same cartoons.
Thank goodness, he's made it at last! Now
he's in the right place, and the cartoon
ends in a burst of pride and glory. Now
naturally, I can't tell you all the jokes
in advance; I've got to leave some of you
to discover for yourselves, which I hope
you will so that you get the maximum
enjoyment out of this delightful first
movement of the Ninth Symphony by Dmitri
Shostakovich.
The second movement of this Ninth
Symphony by Shostakovich doesn't seem to
be a joke at all, at first: it's a quiet,
sweet, little waltz -- actually rather sad.
There's no horseplay here, as there was with
the trombone in the first movement -- in
fact, the trumpets and trombones don't
play at all in this piece, and neither
does the percussion. It's all on a much
smaller scale, almost like chamber music,
with haunting, long melodies played by
solo woodwind instruments. It opens with
this clarinet solo:
And so it goes on, wending its melancholy
way. And later, that same long line is
repeated by the solo flute, and at the
very end by our old friend the piccolo,
who as you'll see has changed from his
perky personality of the first movement
into this gently wistful one. In
between these different woodwind solos,
the strings play strange, yearning waves
of melody:
It's rather brooding, isn't it?
[WITH ACCENT] Very Russian! Now, certainly none of that
material sounds particularly humorous or
jokey. Well, then, where does the humor
come in? Didn't I say that this whole
symphony was a comedy? All right, let me
explain. The humor of this movement is
that it just doesn't belong in a
symphony at all -- especially a ninth
symphony. With its reduced chamber-size
orchestra and its sad little waltz
themes, it's more like what used to be
called "salon music" -- that is, music not so
much for the concert hall as for hotel
lobbies and old-fashioned restaurants,
and maybe a private, elegant tea party.
It's a piece that might have been called,
in times gone by,
"Valse Mélancolique," or something like that --
which just doesn't mean a melancholy
waltz, but suggests a whole era of grand,
faded elegance. And the fact that
Shostakovich puts this of all things
into his Ninth Symphony shows a very
subtle brand of humor -- nothing to make
you fall on the floor with laughter, but
to fill you with a light, sweet,
unexpected pleasure. Again, it's the
unexpected quality of it that makes you
smile, even a melancholy smile. So here is
the very unsymphonic second movement of this most
unusual symphony.
Pretty, charming, sweet music -- and anything
but symphonic, I think you'll agree. But
now, enough of melancholy: from here on in,
the jokes fly, thick and fast. The three
little movements which conclude this
symphony are all joined together, played
continuously, like one big stream of fun.
First comes the scherzo, that
traditionally humorous movement that
occurs in almost every symphony. In fact,
the word "scherzo" means "joke" in Italian,
and Shostakovich's Scherzo is no
exception. It's fast, light-hearted, and brilliant,
full of rollicking rhythms, delicious
wrong notes, and startling twists of
harmony. And right in the middle of this
playful movement, there is suddenly a
stamping Spanish rhythm, over which a
solo trumpet blares out a startling
Spanish tune, like bullfight music:
Now, what in the world is a Spanish
bullfighter doing in this symphony? Well,
as I said, it's full of surprises;
anything can happen. It's as though
suddenly at a party, somebody grabbed the
Spanish shawl off the piano and wrapped
himself in it and gave out with a wild
gypsy dance. It's insane! But the best joke of
the Scherzo is still to come, which is
that it simply dies. Imagine, this
rollicking peace suddenly winds down, like
an old phonograph, and comes to an
embarrassed stop on the most unlikely
note, as if it didn't know quite what to
do or where to go. And where it does go
is the most unexpected place of all --
straight into the fourth movement,
which is a total surprise: it's only two
pages long. You can't really even call it
a movement. But in those two pages, we
find the main joke of the whole symphony,
because the music suddenly becomes slow
and pompous and solemn. Imagine, in the
middle of this happy little symphony, the
trombones, with all their might, thunder out
a majestic fanfare, as if to introduce
some great tragic utterance.
Good heavens, what a change! Is this joke-
symphony really going to pieces? What are
we doing with great utterances? It's gone
insane! But let's see what this tragic
statement turns out to be. It turns out to
be a bassoon solo in a free reciting
style, very mournful and very tragic.
Now that doesn't seem to belong in this
symphony any more than that Spanish
fandango we heard before! Why just that
bassoon solo? I'll tell you: it's a
private musical joke, because what
Shostakovich is doing is imitating a similar
passage in Beethoven's Ninth Symphony,
the part that introduces the famous "Ode
to Joy," which I'm sure you all know:
[SINGS] "Freude, schöner Götterfunken,
Tochter aus Elysium" -- you know that.
...Yes, I see you do. [AUDIENCE LAUGHS]
Well, just before that place in the Ninth
Symphony, Beethoven has put this
recitation by the cellos and basses:
And now here, Shostakovich -- and his Ninth
Symphony -- has his mournful bassoon doing
much the same thing, even in the same key --
-- as if to say, "this is going to be a real
Ninth Symphony, tragic and monumental and
everything! Just like Beethoven!" So, he has
his trombones repeat the pompous fanfare,
and again he has the bassoon wail out
that cadenza, only even more mournful now
and more Russian, more emotional. And that's
the end of the whole fourth movement,
because, super-surprise of all, that same
doleful bassoon, without so much as
drawing breath from his last note, slyly sneaks
into a kittenish little dance tune.
And the tune gradually gathers momentum, as
little by little the whole orchestra
picks it up, until soon we're galloping
away into the fifth and final movement,
which is a brilliant breathless Rondo.
And so it turns out that, after all, that
pompous little fourth movement was just
a decoy to lure us into expecting a real
Ninth Symphony -- a great Beethoven-ish
one -- and then only to find that it's
still that same, darling little
Shostakovich Ninth that we started with.
It's like sitting down to a big, serious
banquet and being served hotdogs and
potato chips. Some people might not
think that very funny, either, but I am
sorry for them, because they won't get
the jokes in this symphony. So you have
to have as much of a sense of humor to
appreciate this music as Shostakovich
had to have in order to write it. And I
very much hope that you do, so that you
can now enjoy these concluding three
movements: that Spanish-type scherzo, and
then the pompous trombone and bassoon
bit, and the exciting final joyride. Happy
listening, and happy birthday, Dmitri
Shostakovich!
From Philharmonic Hall in Lincoln Center,
another program in the award-winning
series, the New York Philharmonic Young
People's Concerts, under the musical
direction of Leonard Bernstein, has
presented "A Birthday Tribute to Dmitri
Shostakovich." Featured today was a
complete performance of Shostakovich's
Ninth Symphony.